WIP Add authentication generator documentation (#10)
bhumi1102/rails: guides/source/security.md

Securing Rails Applications
===========================

This guide describes common security problems in web applications and how to avoid them with Rails.

After reading this guide, you will know:

> * How use the built-in authentication generator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* How to use the built-in authentication generator.
```

In order to develop secure web applications you have to keep up to date on all layers and know your enemies. To keep up to date subscribe to security mailing lists, read security blogs, and make updating and security checks a habit (check the [Additional Resources](#additional-resources) chapter). It is done manually because that's how you find the nasty logical security problems.

Authentication
--------------

Authentication is often one the first features implemented in a web application. It serves as the foundation for securing user data and is part of most modern web applications.

> Rails 8 introduces an authentication generator, which provides a solid starting point for securing your application by only allowing access to verified users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with version 8.0, Rails now comes with a default authentication generator, which provides a solid starting point for securing your application by only allowing access to verified users.
```

Reviewer: Thinking of how this will read in the future when Rails 8 is old news.

Reviewer 2: For most apps, authentication is probably the first thing to implement.
I don't think there will be many who want to add authentication to a Rails 6.1 app.
Anyone reading this to implement authentication probably has a relatively new app started on Rails 8.0.
So maybe we won't need to mention Rails 8 here?

> The authentication generator adds relevant models, controllers, views, routes, and migrations to your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The authentication generator adds all of the relevant models, controllers, views, routes, and migrations needed for securing your application with basic authentication and password reset functionality.
```

Reviewer: Took the last sentence from this section and merged it with this line.

    generate  migration CreateSessions user:references ip_address:string user_agent:string --force
       rails  generate migration CreateSessions user:references ip_address:string user_agent:string --force
      invoke  active_record
      create    db/migrate/20241010215314_create_sessions.rb
```

As shown above, the authentication generator modifies the `Gemfile` to add the `bcrypt` gem. The generator uses the `bcrypt` gem for storing a hash of the password in the database (instead of plain-text passwords). As this process is not reversible, there's no way to go from the hash back to the password.

The generator adds two migrations for creating `user` and `session` tables. Next step is to run the migrations:

```bash
$ bin/rails db:migrate
```

Then, if you visit `/session/new` in your browser (you will see this route has been added in `routes.rb`), you'll see a form that accepts an email and a password with "sign in" button. This form routes to the `SessionsController` which was added by the generator. If you provide an email/password for a user that exists in the database, you will be able to successfully authenticate with those credentials and login to the application.

> NOTE: After running the Authentication generator, you do need to implement your own *sign up flow* and add the necessary views, routes, and controller actions. There is no code generated that creates new `user` records and allows users to "sign up" in the first place. This is something you'll need to wire up based on the requirements of your application.

Reviewer: Do we have anywhere in the guides where we can point readers where this is already documented?

Reviewer 2: I don't think so.

Reviewer: Didn't think so. Thanks!

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def create
    if user = User.authenticate_by(params.permit(:email_address, :password))
      start_new_session_for user
      redirect_to after_authentication_url
    else
      redirect_to new_session_url, alert: "Try another email address or password."
    end
  end

  # ...
end
```

#### Session Management

The core functionality around session management is implemented in the `Authentication` controller concern, which is included by the `ApplicationController` in your application. You can explore details of the [authentication concern](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/railties/lib/rails/generators/rails/authentication/templates/app/controllers/concerns/authentication.rb.tt) in the source code.

TIP: You can find all of the details for the Authentication generator in the Rails source code. You are encouraged to explore the implementation details and not treat authentication as a black box.

> The authentication generator adds all of the files needed for securing your application with basic authentication and password reset functionality.

Reviewer: This last sentence feels out of place, like it should be near the beginning.

> The authentication generator adds all of the files needed for securing your application with basic authentication and password reset functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the authentication generator configured as above, your application is ready for a more secure user authentication and password recovery process in just a few steps.
```

Reviewer: Changing the last sentence of this section to more formally close it out. This is just a suggestion.

Another (additional) approach is to store the file names in the database and name the files on the disk after the ids in the database. This is also a good approach to avoid possible code in an uploaded file to be executed. The `attachment_fu` plugin does this in a similar way.

Authentication
--------------

Rails 8 introduces an authentication generator, which is meant to be a solid starting point for securing your application by only allowing access to verified users.

> The authentication generator adds authentication related models, controllers, views, routes, and migrations to your application.

Author: updated that sentence

> To use this feature in a new application, you run `rails generate authentication`. Here are all of file it modifies and new files the generator adds:

Author: Updated this sentence a bit. Though I imagine, in practice, this generator is _not_ likely going to be used in an existing applications, at least not as is (for a number of reasons, for one: it generates a `user` model and would overwrite existing `user` model, etc.). So keeping the instructions focused on new applications.

  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
  modified:   Gemfile
  modified:   Gemfile.lock
  modified:   app/controllers/application_controller.rb
  modified:   config/routes.rb

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
  app/controllers/concerns/authentication.rb
  app/controllers/passwords_controller.rb
  app/controllers/sessions_controller.rb
  app/mailers/passwords_mailer.rb
  app/models/current.rb
  app/models/session.rb
  app/models/user.rb
  app/views/passwords/
  app/views/passwords_mailer/
  app/views/sessions/
  db/migrate/
  db/schema.rb
  test/mailers/previews/
```

### Forgot Password

The authentication generator also implements forgot password functionality. You can see a "forgot password?" link on the "sign in" page. Clicking that link navigates to the `passwords/new` path and routes to the passwords controller. The `new` method of the `PasswordsController` class runs through the flow for sending a password reset email.

The mailers for forgot password are also set up by the generator at `app/mailers/password_mailer.rb` and renders the following email to send to the user:

> ```html

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```html+erb
```

# app/views/passwords_mailer/reset.html.erb
<p>
  You can reset your password within the next 15 minutes on
  <%= link_to "this password reset page", edit_password_url(@user.password_reset_token) %>.
</p>
```

### Implementation Details

This section covers some of the implementation details for the authentication generator in Rails: The `has_secure_password` method, the `authenticate_by` method, and the `Authentication` concern.

> The [`has_secure_password`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveModel/SecurePassword/ClassMethods.html#method-i-has_secure_password) method is added to the `user` model and takes care of storing a hashed password using the `bcrypt` algorithm:

Author: I did that, and then undid it as I thought they were too short. But I'll do it again since you also think that will be useful :)

```ruby
class SessionsController < ApplicationController
  def create
    if user = User.authenticate_by(params.permit(:email_address, :password))
      start_new_session_for user
      redirect_to after_authentication_url
    else
      redirect_to new_session_url, alert: "Try another email address or password."
    end
  end

  # ...
end
```

The core functionality around session management is implemented in the `Authentication` controller concern, which is included by the `ApplicationController` in your application. You can explore details of the [authentication concern](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/railties/lib/rails/generators/rails/authentication/templates/app/controllers/concerns/authentication.rb.tt) in the source code.

TIP: You can find all of the details for the Authentication generator in the Rails source code. You are encouraged to explore the implementation details and not treat authentication as a black box.

> The authentication generator is meant to be a solid starting point for securing your application by authenticating users.

Reviewer 3: I agree that we need some sort of 'rounding-off' sentence here, but I think this one repeats what's in the introduction a little closely.

Maybe something like 'As outlined in the sections above, Rails authentication generator provides an out-of-the-box solution for authenticating users at a basic level, making your application more secure.'? Not perfect, but maybe a start!

Author: Yeah :) Thanks for the suggestion. Updated the concluding sentence.

Another (additional) approach is to store the file names in the database and name the files on the disk after the ids in the database. This is also a good approach to avoid possible code in an uploaded file to be executed. The `attachment_fu` plugin does this in a similar way.

Authentication
--------------

> Rails 8 introduces an authentication generator, which is meant to be a solid starting point for securing your application by only allowing access to verified users.

Author: We generally avoid mentioning a version in the docs, so I can remove the Rails 8 part. Though I felt like clarifying in this case as having "authentication" in Rails is a "big" shift. I'll probably just say "Rails" though.
